Imagine a technology that simultaneously over-surveils and completely ignores the exact same group
of people. That double-bind is called coded exposure. This matters because law enforcement
heavily relies on facial recognition software to identify criminal suspects.
Take the commercial facial analysis systems used to scan diverse populations on the street.
To see how accurate these tools really are, researchers tested major algorithms
by mapping their performance across four intersectional demographic groups.
For lighter-skinned men, the systems were virtually flawless. Their error rate was less than 1%.
But when the exact same algorithms processed images of darker-skinned women,
the error rate drastically spiked to 34.7%. This massive gap reveals the paradox of coded
exposure. The demographic group most heavily targeted by police surveillance networks
is the exact same group these algorithms are the worst at identifying.
When a system can't accurately distinguish faces within a heavily policed community,
it inevitably generates confident, erroneous matches that turn innocent individuals into
targets. So today, being invisible to a facial recognition algorithm doesn't protect you from
surveillance. It actively increases your risk of being falsely accused by it.